The Shahnama is the world’s longest epic poem, written by Ferdowsi around 1012 AD.
Like all long-running stories, some characters make recurring appearances, and some antagonize the main
characters. One antagonist is Afrasiyab of Turan, fierce enemy to Iran. Afrasiyab is pictured
here. He’s the one with the sword. Now let’s take a look at the story
this image is from and see why he has such an axe to grind.
Afrasiyab is leading Turan’s 400,000-man army in an invasion of Iran and Shah Naudar’s
140,000. After three battles, Naudar’s battered army retreats. Naudar and some survivors are captured by
Afrasiyab and the other half kill some of Turanians. In retaliation, Afrasiyab decapitates Naudar in
front of his own soldiers and more Iranians who are watching from the hills. Afrasiyab
then crowns himself king over Iran, until they can reorganize and overthrow him. Here is
the exact passage from the Shahnama and the lines from the text that the illustration
is derived from, which are called the break-line verse (Mehran, p. 1): “Full of impatience the great Afrasiyab
Looked out for him, and seeing him approach / Reminded him of their ancestral feud…‘Thou
hast deserved whatever ill may come,’ / He said, called fiercely for a scimitar, / Smote Shah
Naudar upon the neck and flung / In foul contempt the body in the dust… / And
left Iran bereft of throne and crown” (Firdowsi ed. Warner, p. 361-2). Our image is from a Safavid illustrated
copy of the Shahnama made in Iran in 1604. The artist centrally depicts the moment
of decapitation, with blood spatter on the scimitar and the ground. Naudar’s crown is knocked
off, and is lower on the page than his head and body. The shah has
fallen, and his army and kingdom with him. Even the Turanians cover their mouths, shocked
at Afrasiyab’s swift brutality, and the Iranian onlookers in the hills cover their mouths as well.
Afrasiyab intends to make a great statement. He brings the prisoners to his command tent
where his soldiers are and performs this execution in front of many witnesses to assert
his dominance, stoking fear in the Iranians and his own men. This cruelty prompts Afrasiyab’s
brother, Ighriras, to call for mercy. This feud reminds me of cartel wars in Breaking Bad.
Gus Fring’s partner is killed, and years later, he kills Hector Salamanca in his nursing
home when he has him imprisoned in his room. Now, Gus kills Hector without eyewitnesses,
but the rivals both reign over large kingdoms that are just a little too close to
each other, and their wars are marked by large assaults and revenge killings of leaders.
In the Shahnama, as Mahallati writes, “Ferdowsi refrains from… mapping good and evil within political
boundaries” (p. 910). Although Afrasiyab’s cruelty is shocking, the Turanians themselves are not condemned as evil.
Ighriras, in opposition to Afrasiyab, is a peacemaker. This ancient work shows war for the
tragic occupation that it is, with neither side free of loss nor judged to be
right or wrong. To conclude, the Safavids who illustrated the story would find a lot
in common with the Iran of the past. Shock and mourning accompany news of Shah
Naudar’s execution, with which the Safavids would have empathized greatly. Safavid society depended highly on
the shah; in 1600, the shah would command the Safavid chiefs in charge of the
cavalry, and the infantry were paid by and owed their loyalty to the shah (Roy, p. 115),
making the shah in essence the commander-in-chief and the political leader. And losing him
would, metaphorically, be cutting the head off the kingdom, which is exactly the situation Iran finds itself in here.